Category: .  The properties of the first black holes (BH) that 'seeded' the growth of supermassive BHs are poorly understood, even though these seed BHs represent critical boundary conditions for models of BH/galaxy (co)-evolution.  Local dwarf galaxies provide our best opportunity to obtain observational constraints.  Here, we propose multiwavelength Chandra, HST and VLA observations to investigate the nature of candidate nuclear BHs in three nearby dwarfs.	Our targets were recently identified within the Chandra archive, and they represent a population missed by surveys at optical wavelengths.  These observations will place new constraints on seed BH masses, and they will help inform future multiwavelength surveys for BHs in the nuclei of dwarf galaxies.
Category: STAR FORMATION.  For a sample of 13 star-forming galaxies at 1 < z < 1.4, selected from an ongoing IRAM/PdBI CO survey that measures molecular gas masses, we propose HST/WFC3-IR G141 grism spectroscopy to measure Halpha fluxes and sizes. The spatial resolution of HST combined with the sensitivity of Halpha as a star-formation indicator afford the ability to precisely trace the current amount and extent of star formation in galaxies at z > 1, physical properties that are poorly constrained with ground-based or Spitzer IR observations. Together, the HST and radio data will create the first sample of relatively typical star-forming galaxies at high redshift that have measurements of both molecular gas and star formation rate {SFR} surface densities. Combined with existing HST grism observations of 3 additional galaxies from our CO survey {for a total of 16 sources}, this dataset will provide unprecedented insight into what fueled the high level of global star formation at z > 1 and what drove its decline over the last 7 Gyr. The precise measurements of current SFR and its spatial extent, derived from WFC3 spectroscopy, will enable us to determine if the higher SFRs at high redshift are due to greater supplies of cold gas or greater star formation efficiencies. Furthermore, the proposed observations will allow us to test the applicability of the Kennicutt-Schmidt relation for star formation rate versus gas surface density at high redshift, where the bulk of star formation occurs. This relation, which is a critical component of galaxy formation models, remains poorly constrained beyond the local Universe.
Category: UNRESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS.  Outcomes of violent dissipative and non-dissipative galaxy mergers are predicted to have different dynamical states and different nuclear profiles. The current paradigm is that flat {core} light profiles are results of coalescence of supermassive black holes in non-dissipative mergers of galaxies. These merger are also thought to produce remnants with low angular momentum {slow rotators} within a half-light radius. Matching the archival HST imaging with the volume-limited Atlas3D sample of nearby early-type galaxies {with integral-field stellar kinematics}, indicates that the current paradigm is not complete. A recent study revealed the existence of fast rotating galaxies with core nuclear light profiles, and, more significantly, it postulated the existence of core-less slow rotators. The implication on galaxy formation scenarios of the latter finding is straightforward: dissipative mergers can create dynamically different galaxies both of high and low angular momentum. Unfortunately, the sample of Atlas3D galaxies with HST imaging misses a key set of low angular momentum objects with intermediate masses which provide the unique opportunity to {i} determine to what extent and to what upper mass limit dissipative processes dominate the formation of ETGs and {ii} to conclusively test the connection between nuclear structure and global parameters such as the stellar angular momentum, total mass and stellar velocity dispersion. We ask to observe the 12 carefully selected galaxies in this category.
Category: .  New and fundamental constraints on the evolutionary state of high redshift clusters will be made by obtaining deep, multiband images {SDSS g, r, i, z} over the central 1.5 Mpc regions of seven distant clusters in the range 0.76 < z < 1.27. In addition, slitless spectroscopy, using the WFC GRISM, will be performed over the central 750 kpc region of each system. The ACS data will allow us to: {1} definitively establish the morphological composition and star formation rates as functions of clustercentric radius, local density, x-ray luminosity {obtained from accompanying Chandra, and XMM data}, {2} explore the relationship between substructure, kinematics, and morphology, {3} strongly constrain the galaxy merger frequency and the origins of elliptical and S0 galaxies, {4} measure the mass distribution independently from the light {via gravitational lensing} enabling comparisons with kinematically derived masses, and {5} study the evolution of the structure of the brightest cluster members. <br> The clusters selected for this program already have extensive spectroscopic observations and NIR imaging is either in hand or underway from approved ground based programs. To date, the lower part of this redshift range has only been marginally studied with HST. Our sample includes the two most distant, spectroscopically confirmed superclusters and will significantly increase the baseline over which evolutionary effects can be studied. The data will also be used to identify very high-z galaxies via their unique spectral properties. {6} where possible two or more epochs will be used to study supernova rates in the clusters and in the field.
Category: GALAXIES & CLUSTERS CLUSTERS/LENSES.  We propose deep multicolour WFC2 imaging of a sample of gravitationally-lensed `giant arcs' for which extensive ground-based data has already been secured. High resolution studies of these systems offer an unique probe of the dark matter distribution in the lensing clusters as well as of the nature of background field galaxies at redshifts above one. By resolving the arcs and their counter-images with HST, mass models that account for the lensing are much more highly constrained. This, in turn, will lead to an improved knowledge of the structure of the distant sources. Ground-based photometry indicates most arcs are intensely blue star-forming systems. Morphologies will provide important information on the ancestors of normal galaxies. Extrapolating the trends found in recent ground-based data, we also expect to identify many close image pairs in deep HST images. These pairs are probably highly magnified images of B=28-30 galaxies. The abundance of pairs will place a new constraint on the galaxy count turnover and hence the epoch of galaxy formation. Our program is uniquely suited to WFC2 and builds on a wealth of existing deep ground-based optical/infrared data.
Category: Galaxies and the IGM.  Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) are an enigmatic class of extragalactic object, whose study so far has been almost exclusively the domain of radio telescopes due to the inability to localize them to better than a few arcminutes. We propose to use HST to spatially resolve the morphology and distribution of star formation and stellar mass for the host galaxies of the first three non-repeating FRBs ever localized to <1" accuracy by the Australian SKA Pathfinder telescope. Analogous to previous advances with gamma-ray bursts, supernovae, and gravitational-wave counterparts, we will explore the origin of these FRBs through detailed examination of their host galaxies. By contrast with the dwarf galaxy host of the unusual repeating FRB 121102, our complementary ground-based observations have shown these non-repeating FRBs to lie in the outskirts of early-type galaxies having low star formation rates. However only HST offers the spatial resolution necessary to match the precision of the radio localizations in the ultraviolet through near-infrared that is required to properly characterize their environment, and thereby shed light on the nature of their progenitor objects.
Category: AGN/QUASARS.  The recent progress in the study of central black holes in galactic nuclei has led to a general consensus that supermassive {10^6-10^9 solar mass} black holes are closely connected with the formation and evolutionary history of large galaxies, especially their bulge component. Two outstanding issues, however, remain unresolved. Can central black holes form in the absence of a bulge? And does the mass function of central black holes extend below 10^6 solar masses? Intermediate-mass black holes {10^4-10^6 solar masses}, if they exist, may offer important clues to the nature of the seeds of supermassive black holes. In a first systematic search using the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, we have recently discovered 19 Type 1 AGNs with candidate intermediate-mass black holes that reside in low-luminosity, presumably late-type host galaxies. Follow-up observations with Keck indicate that these objects obey the low-mass extension of the well-known correlation between black hole mass and bulge stellar velocity dispersion. However, very little is known about the host galaxies themselves, including the crucial question of whether they have bulges or not. We propose to obtain ACS/WFC images of this unique sample of AGNs in order to investigate the detailed structural properties of the host galaxies. We are particularly keen to determine whether the hosts contain bulges, and if so, where they lie on the fundamental plane of spheroids compared to the bulges of supermassive black holes. We will also be able to measure an accurate optical luminosity for the AGN, which is an essential ingredient to improve the current mass estimates.
Category: GALAXIES & CLUSTERS.  WFPC2 observations are requested to obtain UBVI images of IC 2163/NGC 2207, the best example of five well-studied galaxy pairs that exhibit peculiar structures suggestive of recent, close, strong, non--merging encounters. Our ground-based observations of this pair reveal 10^8 M_odot HI clouds, streaming motions in excess of 100 km s^-1, enhanced gas turbulence, an intrinsically oval disk, possible dwarf galaxy formation in tidal debris, and a large warp, all indicative of extreme tidal agitation but with no sign yet of a nuclear starburst. Our numerical models reproduce these features and suggest that perigalacticon occurred ~40 My ago. HST is needed to resolve a tidal--arm dust lane that is probably a shock front, young star clusters that may be proto--globular, embedded star formation in fast--streaming gas, in 10^8 M_odot clouds, and in tidal debris, and dust lane structure in a morphologically peculiar bar that may become a nuclear starburst. All of these observations will help clarify how galaxy interactions cause shocks, trigger star formation, and possibly make bars. A partial line--of--sight overlap of IC 2163 also allows a direct measurement of extinction through the galaxy disk of NGC 2207.
Category: Galaxies.  Physical processes governing the formation/evolution of high-redshift galaxies in the epoch of reionization (EoR; z>6) are still not well understood.	In most cases, EoR galaxies are fuzzy faint blobs showing little internal structure, and fitting various theoretical models to spatially-integrated spectral energy distributions (SEDs) is often all that can be done.  There are, however, a small number of luminous EoR galaxies, such as Himiko at z=6.595 and CR7 at z=6.601, whose exceptional brightnesses have allowed spatially-resolved studies and have revealed some fascinating details.  Although such luminous EoR galaxies are rare, the Subary/Hyper Suprime-Cam (HSC) survey has recently discovered 7 comparably bright EoR galaxies with y < 25 mag (in comparison, y=25.4 and 24.5 mag with Himiko and CR7, respectively). Here, we propose to obtain HST/WFC3 near-infrared images for these exceptionally luminous z>6 galaxies with the F105W, F125W, and F160W filters. Our goals are, (1) to identify the rest-frame UV continuum morphology, (2) to measure UV continuum spectral slopes, and (3) to compare the UV continuum morphology with those of Ly-alpha, [C II], and dust emission when possible. The obtained HST data will allow us to probe the internal structures and underlying physical processes in these remarkable high-redshift galaxies.  The targeted z>6 EoR galaxies are so bright that they will also make excellent targets for NIRSpec IFU observations, enabling us to study the internal structure and kinematics of these high-redshift galaxies in greater detail. The obtained HST data will also be essential to make effective us of precious JWST time.
Category: .  New and fundamental constraints on the evolutionary state of high redshift clusters will be made by obtaining deep, multiband images {SDSS g, r, i, z} over the central 1.5 Mpc regions of seven distant clusters in the range 0.76 < z < 1.27. In addition, slitless spectroscopy, using the WFC GRISM, will be performed over the central 750 kpc region of each system. The ACS data will allow us to: {1} definitively establish the morphological composition and star formation rates as functions of clustercentric radius, local density, x-ray luminosity {obtained from accompanying Chandra, and XMM data}, {2} explore the relationship between substructure, kinematics, and morphology, {3} strongly constrain the galaxy merger frequency and the origins of elliptical and S0 galaxies, {4} measure the mass distribution independently from the light {via gravitational lensing} enabling comparisons with kinematically derived masses, and {5} study the evolution of the structure of the brightest cluster members. <br> The clusters selected for this program already have extensive spectroscopic observations and NIR imaging is either in hand or underway from approved ground based programs. To date, the lower part of this redshift range has only been marginally studied with HST. Our sample includes the two most distant, spectroscopically confirmed superclusters and will significantly increase the baseline over which evolutionary effects can be studied. The data will also be used to identify very high-z galaxies via their unique spectral properties. {6} where possible two or more epochs will be used to study supernova rates in the clusters and in the field.
