Category: AGN.  Radio galaxies are an important class of extragalactic objects: they represent one of the most energetic astrophysical phenomena; they may be used as probes of their environments; and they are unique probes of the early Universe. The size scales and brightness levels which HST can measure are ideally suited to the study of optical emission associated with the host galaxies of radio sources and anomalies such as jets and tidal debris. In Cycle 4 we carried out a red continuum snapshot survey of the 3CR catalog to ask: What are the host galaxy morphologies --- are there differences between FR-I and FR-II sources, nuclear cusps, tidal tails? How common are optical jets? Do optical continuum and radio structures align? How common are dust- discs; what is their orientation and morphology? In Cycle 5 we are observing emission line 3C sources to map circumnuclear ionized gas, identify where jets and gas interact, and find gas disks and filaments. Here we propose to add blue continuum observations to provide unique high spatial resolution information on the color distribution within galaxies, the reddening due to dust, the spectral indices of optical synchrotron jets and the colors of active nuclei and tidal tails. We will measure colors of star clusters at low redshift and see how the alignment effect ``turns on'' with redshift at a second, bluer wavelength. The resulting database on one of the most studied samples ever will be a major resource for the astronomical community and we will waive proprietary rights to these data.
Category: UNRESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS.  We propose to obtain images of 13 relatively luminous early type galaxies in the Coma cluster and Abell 262 for which we have already  collected ground based major and minor axis spectra and images. The higher resolution HST images will enable us to study the central regions of these galaxies which is crucial to our dynamical modelling. The complete data set will allow us to perform a full dynamical analysis and to derive the dark matter content and distribution, the stellar orbital structure, and the stellar population properties of these objects, probing the predictions of galaxy formation models. The dynamical analysis will be performed using an up-to-date axi-symmetric orbit superposition code.
Category: GALAXIES.  The two rich clusters nearest to the Milky Way, and the only large collections of early-type galaxies within ~ 25 Mpc, are the Virgo and Fornax Clusters. We propose to exploit the exceptional imaging capabilities of the ACS/WFC to carry out the most comprehensive imaging survey to date of early-type galaxies in Fornax: the ACS Fornax Cluster Survey. Deep ACS/WFC images -- in the F475W {g'} and F850LP {z'} bands -- will be acquired for 44 E, S0, dE, dE, N and dS0 cluster members. In Cycle 11, we initiated a similar program targeting early-type galaxies in the Virgo Cluster {the ACS Virgo Cluster Survey; GO-9401}. Our proposed survey of Fornax would yield an extraordinary dataset which would complement that already in hand for Virgo, and allow a definitive study of the role played by environment in the structure, formation and evolution of early-type galaxies and their globular cluster systems, nuclei, stellar populations, dust content, nuclear morphologies and merger histories. It would also be a community resource for years to come and, together with the ACS Virgo Cluster Survey, constitute one of the lasting legacies of HST.
Category: RESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS.  Models of galaxy formation in a cosmological context predict that massive disk galaxies should have richly-structured extended stellar halos, containing ~10% of a galaxy's stars, originating in large part from the tidal disruption of dwarf galaxies. Observations of a number of nearby disk galaxies have generally agreed with these expectations.  Recent new observations in integrated light with a novel array of low scattered-light telephoto lenses have failed to convincingly detect a stellar halo in the nearby massive face-on disk galaxy M101 (van Dokkum et al. 2014). They argue that any halo has to have <0.3% of the mass of the galaxy. This halo would be the least massive of any massive disk galaxy in the local Universe (by factors of several) -- such a halo is not predicted or naturally interpreted by the models, and would present a critical challenge to the picture of ubiquitous stellar halos formed from the debris of disrupting dwarf galaxies.  We propose to resolve the stellar populations of this uniquely anemic stellar halo for 6 orbits with HST (ACS and WFC3), allowing us to reach surface brightness limits sufficient to clearly detect and characterize M101's stellar halo if it carries more than 0.1% of M101's mass. With resolved stellar populations, we can use the gradient of stellar populations as a function of radius to separate stellar halo from disk, which is impossible using integrated light observations. The resolved stellar populations will reveal the halo mass to much greater accuracy, measure the halo radial profile, constrain any halo lopsidedness, estimate the halo's stellar metallicity, and permit an analysis of outer disk stellar populations.
Category: EXOPLANETS.  Fomalhaut is a bright nearby star that harbors a belt of dusty material with a morphology that  has been used to predict the presence of a shepherding planet.  With ACS/HRC coronagraphy, we have achieved the direct detection of a planet candidate {Fomalhaut b} in F606W and F814W.  The planet candidate lies 18 AU interior to the dust belt and we detect counterclockwise orbital motion in two epochs of observations {2004 and 2006}.	 Fomalhaut b has mass no greater than three Jupiter masses based on an analysis of its luminosity, including non-detections at infrared wavelengths, and the dynamical argument that a significantly more massive object would disrupt the dust belt. Variability at optical wavelengths and the brightness in the F606W passband suggest additional sources of luminosity such as starlight reflected from a circumplanetary ring system.   A second possibility that has been invoked for substellar objects is a significant contribution of H-alpha emission.  Here we propose follow-up WFPC2 observations to test the possibility that the F606W flux is contaminated by H-alpha emission.  We demonstrate that the detection of Fomalhaut b using WFPC2 is feasible using roll deconvolution.  Furthermore, a detection of Fomalhaut b in 2009 will provide a crucial third epoch for astrometry.  With the existing two epochs of data, the orbit of Fomalhaut b cannot be determined uniquely.	The third epoch will be used to test the prediction of apsidal alignment and more accurately determine the dynamical mass of Fomalhaut b.  If apsidal mis-alignment is found between the planet and the belt, this result would point to the existence of still other planets lurking unseen in the Fomalhaut system.
Category: Cosmology.  Improved measurements of the Hubble constant demonstrate that the Universe is expanding at present about 9% faster than expected from the LambdaCDM model calibrated to the early Universe, with a significance approaching 4 sigma. The higher, local value has been confirmed by 5 independent, geometric calibrations of Cepheids, now including Gaia DR2 parallaxes.  Cepheid relative distances have been confirmed by those from TRGB and Miras.  At the other end, the low expected value of H_0 predicted from the early Universe is corroborated by independent measurements of the CMB or Omega_B with BAO data. This "H_0 Tension'', as it is widely known, offers the exciting and best opportunity in decades of discovering new fundamental physics such as exotic dark energy, a new relativistic particle, dark matter-radiation interactions or a small curvature, each producing a different-sized shift.  Pinpointing the cause of the tension requires continued focus on precision and accuracy in the local measurements.  After Gaia, the small number of SNe Ia calibrated with Cepheids will dominate the final error.  A modest tweak in the observing strategy can provide a 50%-70% boost in the volume and sample reachable by Cepheids. We propose a two-in-one program to achieve a dual purpose: to extend the range of Cepheid measurements to increase the sample of Cepheid/SN Ia hosts and the precision of H_0, opening a path to reach 1%, while simultaneously confirming the tension with a simpler route that is independent of SNe Ia, the only part of the distance ladder without independent corroboration.	On the cusp of a possible breakthrough, an investment is needed to pinpoint the cause of the tension.
Category: UNRESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS AND GALAXY STRUCTURE.  We propose to use WFC3 to perform a contiguous, high spatial resolution UV (F336W) and IR (F160W) survey of an area of ~100 square arcminutes in the core of the Coma cluster of galaxies. The area is already surveyed by our group in optical passbands with the ACS F475W and F814W filters. The new UV and IR data will be used, in combination with existing ACS data, for studies of the populations of Globular Clusters (GCs), Ultra-Compact Dwarf Galaxies (UCDs), and Nuclear Star Clusters (NSCs) in Coma galaxies and in the cluster environment. Using an innovative technique developed by members of our team, we can essentially eliminate foreground and background contamination from samples of compact stellar systems. This allows us, for the first time, to perform the most detailed assessment and study of the very large population of Intracluster GCs in a nearby rich cluster (i.e. Coma), to find why this population is so abundant, and why it contains such a significant metal-rich component, which is unexpected if the origin is from stripping of clusters from low-mass dwarf galaxies. For NSCs, the additional passbands will allow us to test predictions of the relationship between NSC properties and age and metallicity gradients in the host galaxies, which in turn helps to understand the NSC formation mechanisms, and the timescale and feedback process that truncate the star formation. This is the last opportunity to perform a rest-frame UV survey at z=0, given the rapidly declining capability of WFC3/UVIS and the fact that there is no prospect for a future UV space mission for decades to come.
Category: GALAXIES.  We propose to use the ACS/WFC to determine colour {metallicity} distributions and luminosity functions for the globular cluster populations in a well-defined sample of elliptical galaxies in low-density environments, and to compare the results with similar samples taken from a rich cluster environment. Low-luminosity ellipticals are now recognized to play a pivotal role in testing hierarchical models of galaxy formation, and their globular cluster populations provide a unique probe of their star formation and metal enrichment history. The data will be used to {i} determine whether the bimodal colour distributions indicative of multiple formation epochs in luminous ellipticals are also prevalent in low-luminosity field ellipticals; {ii} place joint constraints on age and metallicity in systems with more than one population and determine the spread of ages in any one system; {iii} test whether cluster destruction processes {e.g. tidal shocking} are more effective in low-luminosity ellipticals, as predicted from their higher mass densities. ACS observations are essential to eliminate foreground/background contamination and to probe deep into the luminosity function to obtain a good statistical sample of clusters. The TAC has previously awarded HST time to two large surveys of globular cluster systems in rich cluster environments, but there is currently no comparable survey in low-density environments with which to compare these results.
Category: Planets and Planet Formation.  We propose for HST WFC3 follow-up imaging of a newly discovered population of brown dwarf / planetary mass members of Taurus and Serpens, with the goal of imaging the lowest mass object to date, potentially down to sub-Jupiter mass objects.   The number of known L-type planetary mass objects in Taurus has increased by an order of magnitude in the last two years, from 1 known L to 16.  L-type members of Taurus have estimated masses of 2-7 MJup at ages of 1-10 Myr, thus any companions to these objects will have even lower masses. Thus, this is the first chance to probe multiplicity properties for a purely planetary mass population.  This project potentially offers the opportunity to study the atmospheres of sub-Jupiter mass objects similar to those that will be eventually imaged around young stars with future ELT instrumentation and missions such as LUVOIR.   HST is critical for this project.  HST WFC3 is the only instrument capable of high-resolution imaging in and out of the 1.45 um water absorption feature which uniquely identifies substellar and planetary mass objects.  Using a reddening insensitive index built from photometry in the F850LP, F127M, and F139M filters, we will be able to immediately distinguish bonafide companions from the reddened background stars that are the dominant source of contaminants.
Category: GALAXIES.  We propose to use the ACS/WFC to determine colour {metallicity} distributions and luminosity functions for the globular cluster populations in a well-defined sample of elliptical galaxies in low-density environments, and to compare the results with similar samples taken from a rich cluster environment. Low-luminosity ellipticals are now recognized to play a pivotal role in testing hierarchical models of galaxy formation, and their globular cluster populations provide a unique probe of their star formation and metal enrichment history. The data will be used to {i} determine whether the bimodal colour distributions indicative of multiple formation epochs in luminous ellipticals are also prevalent in low-luminosity field ellipticals; {ii} place joint constraints on age and metallicity in systems with more than one population and determine the spread of ages in any one system; {iii} test whether cluster destruction processes {e.g. tidal shocking} are more effective in low-luminosity ellipticals, as predicted from their higher mass densities. ACS observations are essential to eliminate foreground/background contamination and to probe deep into the luminosity function to obtain a good statistical sample of clusters. The TAC has previously awarded HST time to two large surveys of globular cluster systems in rich cluster environments, but there is currently no comparable survey in low-density environments with which to compare these results.
