Category: UNRESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS.  At luminosities above 10^11.4 L_sun, the space density of far-infrared selected galaxies exceeds that of optically selected galaxies. These `luminous infrared galaxies' {LIRGs} are primarily interacting or merging disk galaxies undergoing enhanced star formation and Active Galactic Nuclei {AGN} activity, possibly triggered as the objects transform into massive S0 and elliptical merger remnants. We propose NICMOS NIC2 imaging of the nuclear regions of a complete sample of 88 L_IR > 10^11.4 L_sun luminous infrared galaxies in the IRAS Revised Bright Galaxy Sample {RBGS: i.e., 60 micron flux density > 5.24 Jy}. This sample is ideal not only in its completeness and sample size, but also in the proximity and brightness of the galaxies. The superb sensitivity and resolution of NICMOS NIC2 on HST enables a unique opportunity to study the detailed structure of the nuclear regions, where dust obscuration may mask star clusters, AGN and additional nuclei from optical view, with a resolution significantly higher than possible with Spitzer IRAC. This survey thus provides a crucial component to our study of the dynamics and evolution of IR galaxies presently underway with Wide-Field, HST ACS/WFC and Spitzer IRAC observations of these 88 galaxies. Imaging will be done with the F160W filter {H-band} to examine as a function of both luminosity and merger stage {i} the luminosity and distribution of embedded star clusters, {ii} the presence of optically obscured AGN and nuclei, {iii} the correlation between the distribution of 1.6 micron emission and the mid-IR emission as detected by Spitzer IRAC, {iv} the evidence of bars or bridges that may funnel fuel into the nuclear region, and {v} the ages of star clusters for which photometry is available via ACS/WFC observations. The NICMOS data, combined with the HST ACS, Spitzer, and GALEX observations of this sample, will result in the most comprehensive study of merging and interacting galaxies to date.
Category: Stellar Populations.  We propose to complete multi-wavelength broad- and narrow-band imaging, from the ultraviolet through the near-infrared, of a sample of 13 of the most extreme star-forming galaxies found in the nearby (D < 100 Mpc) universe. These include massive and dwarf, interacting and isolated, dusty and nearly dust-free galaxies.  The intense star formation in these galaxies can result in the formation of extremely massive young star clusters, in excess of a million solar masses, similar to the most massive known ancient globular clusters and 1-2 orders of magnitude more massive than any young cluster found in nearby quiescent/normal star-forming galaxies.  The properties of clusters and larger scale star-forming clumps in intense star-forming environments are required to address a number of outstanding issues, including whether the fraction of stars in bound clusters or the upper cutoff in cluster mass functions increases with star formation intensity, and how long the clumps survive.  Our results will differentiate between various assumptions and prescriptions for feedback used in the current generation of cosmological hydrodynamic simulations.  The multi-wavelength observations will allow us to constrain dust geometry, and begin to peer through the dust to discover some of the	clusters obscured at UV and optical wavelengths, work that will be completed by JWST.  A similar suite of benchmark HST observations of normal, nearby galaxies already exists as part of the LEGUS project, and will be used as a reference to quantify the extreme star formation in our sample.
Category: UNRESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS.  At luminosities above 10^11.4 L_sun, the space density of far-infrared selected galaxies exceeds that of optically selected galaxies. These `luminous infrared galaxies' {LIRGs} are primarily interacting or merging disk galaxies undergoing enhanced star formation and Active Galactic Nuclei {AGN} activity, possibly triggered as the objects transform into massive S0 and elliptical merger remnants. We propose NICMOS NIC2 imaging of the nuclear regions of a complete sample of 88 L_IR > 10^11.4 L_sun luminous infrared galaxies in the IRAS Revised Bright Galaxy Sample {RBGS: i.e., 60 micron flux density > 5.24 Jy}. This sample is ideal not only in its completeness and sample size, but also in the proximity and brightness of the galaxies. The superb sensitivity and resolution of NICMOS NIC2 on HST enables a unique opportunity to study the detailed structure of the nuclear regions, where dust obscuration may mask star clusters, AGN and additional nuclei from optical view, with a resolution significantly higher than possible with Spitzer IRAC. This survey thus provides a crucial component to our study of the dynamics and evolution of IR galaxies presently underway with Wide-Field, HST ACS/WFC and Spitzer IRAC observations of these 88 galaxies. Imaging will be done with the F160W filter {H-band} to examine as a function of both luminosity and merger stage {i} the luminosity and distribution of embedded star clusters, {ii} the presence of optically obscured AGN and nuclei, {iii} the correlation between the distribution of 1.6 micron emission and the mid-IR emission as detected by Spitzer IRAC, {iv} the evidence of bars or bridges that may funnel fuel into the nuclear region, and {v} the ages of star clusters for which photometry is available via ACS/WFC observations. The NICMOS data, combined with the HST ACS, Spitzer, and GALEX observations of this sample, will result in the most comprehensive study of merging and interacting galaxies to date.
Category: Stellar Populations.  We propose to complete multi-wavelength broad- and narrow-band imaging, from the ultraviolet through the near-infrared, of a sample of 13 of the most extreme star-forming galaxies found in the nearby (D < 100 Mpc) universe. These include massive and dwarf, interacting and isolated, dusty and nearly dust-free galaxies.  The intense star formation in these galaxies can result in the formation of extremely massive young star clusters, in excess of a million solar masses, similar to the most massive known ancient globular clusters and 1-2 orders of magnitude more massive than any young cluster found in nearby quiescent/normal star-forming galaxies.  The properties of clusters and larger scale star-forming clumps in intense star-forming environments are required to address a number of outstanding issues, including whether the fraction of stars in bound clusters or the upper cutoff in cluster mass functions increases with star formation intensity, and how long the clumps survive.  Our results will differentiate between various assumptions and prescriptions for feedback used in the current generation of cosmological hydrodynamic simulations.  The multi-wavelength observations will allow us to constrain dust geometry, and begin to peer through the dust to discover some of the	clusters obscured at UV and optical wavelengths, work that will be completed by JWST.  A similar suite of benchmark HST observations of normal, nearby galaxies already exists as part of the LEGUS project, and will be used as a reference to quantify the extreme star formation in our sample.
Category: HOT STARS.  The largest class of "peculiar" supernovae {SN} is the SN 2002cx-like class. The SN are observationally similar to Type Ia SN, but with several differences that separate them into their own class.  The recently discovered SN 2008ha, which is a member of the class, was extremely faint {M_V = -14.2 mag} and ejected only 0.3 M_sun of material.  Despite its similarities to SN Ia, clearly it did not fully disrupt a Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarf.  This discovery provoked some to question if it was the result of a massive star whose core collapsed to a black hole shortly after creation of a proto-neutron star, allowing only a small amount of ejecta to escape and creating a weak electromagnetic signature.  We propose to observe the SN sites of four very nearby {D < 20 Mpc} members of this class, allowing us to resolve stars in the vicinity of the SN, and place estimates and/or limits on the mass of the progenitor star.  If these SN come from massive stars, we should detect other massive stars in their neighborhood.  Constraining the progenitors of these objects has far-reaching implications for stellar evolution, SN physics, metal enrichment, and black hole creation rates.  This simple experiment should determine if the progenitors were massive stars or white dwarfs.
Category: Massive Black Holes And Their Host Galaxies.  The well-known connections between super-massive black holes and their host galaxies are set by the flow of gas through the circum-nuclear environment. We are currently undertaking a detailed study of the processes that govern these multi-phase, complex flows using deep, high-resolution VLT/SINFONI IFU data and VLT/XSHOOTER spectroscopy from the optical to the near-IR. A novel feature of our program is the uniform analysis of both luminous AGN and carefully matched inactive galaxies. This provides a comparative baseline of the relevant astrophysics with enough numbers for a statistical treatment.  An essential input to our study is the small-scale, filamentary structure of cold gas, best visible in dust maps based on multi-band imaging with the HST. Unfortunately, suitable archival imaging is greatly weighted towards the AGN in our sample, and over half of the inactive control have never been observed with HST. Here we propose to correct this imbalance through broad-band optical and NIR imaging of 21 galaxies with the HST/WFC3 camera. The combination of sensitive optical and NIR imaging and spectroscopic constraints at sub-arcsecond resolution will enable a uniquely detailed view of the circum-nuclear environment in our entire sample, with which we will study the dynamics of gaseous inflows and outflows, excitation conditions and black hole feedback with unprecedented contextual accuracy.
Category: Cosmology.  Improved measurements of the Hubble constant demonstrate that the Universe is expanding at present about 9% faster than expected from the LambdaCDM model calibrated to the early Universe, with a significance approaching 4 sigma. The higher, local value has been confirmed by 5 independent, geometric calibrations of Cepheids, now including Gaia DR2 parallaxes.  Cepheid relative distances have been confirmed by those from TRGB and Miras.  At the other end, the low expected value of H_0 predicted from the early Universe is corroborated by independent measurements of the CMB or Omega_B with BAO data. This "H_0 Tension'', as it is widely known, offers the exciting and best opportunity in decades of discovering new fundamental physics such as exotic dark energy, a new relativistic particle, dark matter-radiation interactions or a small curvature, each producing a different-sized shift.  Pinpointing the cause of the tension requires continued focus on precision and accuracy in the local measurements.  After Gaia, the small number of SNe Ia calibrated with Cepheids will dominate the final error.  A modest tweak in the observing strategy can provide a 50%-70% boost in the volume and sample reachable by Cepheids. We propose a two-in-one program to achieve a dual purpose: to extend the range of Cepheid measurements to increase the sample of Cepheid/SN Ia hosts and the precision of H_0, opening a path to reach 1%, while simultaneously confirming the tension with a simpler route that is independent of SNe Ia, the only part of the distance ladder without independent corroboration.	On the cusp of a possible breakthrough, an investment is needed to pinpoint the cause of the tension.
Category: BLACKHOLES.  We will measure the merger-free galaxy-black hole mass relation for the first time, using a unique, newly-discovered sample of luminous active galactic nuclei (AGN) hosted in galaxies that have not grown via mergers. Our preliminary study has shown that supermassive black holes (SMBHs) in bulgeless galaxies -- i.e., galaxies that have never undergone a significant merger -- can have substantial growth: bulges are not required for the formation and growth of SMBHs. The proposed targets are broad-line AGN with black hole masses spanning a wide mass range (1e6 to >1e9 M_Sun) and hosted in strongly disk dominated galaxies (>80% light from a disk). This sample is an ideal laboratory for understanding merger-free black hole growth and its feedback on the host galaxy. HST imaging will allow us to disentangle bright nuclear emission from host galaxy, measure bulge type and strength, and identify bulgeless galaxies that have evolved under purely secular conditions. In addition, we will determine whether merger-free galaxies lie on the same SMBH-galaxy relation as galaxies with substantial past mergers, or whether merger-free growth results in a separate relation. The answer to this question has profound consequences for the role of baryon dynamics in driving black hole-galaxy co-evolution.
Category: GALAXIES & CLUSTERS.  We propose to obtain WFPC2 optical broad-band {F547M and F814W} and narrow-band Halpha+ionN2 {F658N} images of nuclear starburst rings in four nearby galaxies for which we already have ultraviolet {F220W} FOC data. Nuclear rings {or ``hot- spot'' regions} in barred spirals are some of the nearest and least obscured starburst regions, and HST images of nuclear rings in several galaxies show that the rings contain large populations of super star clusters similar to those recently discovered in other types of starburst systems. These compact clusters, many having luminosities exceeding that of the R136 cluster in 30 Doradus, represent a violent mode of star formation distinct from that seen in ordinary disk ionH2 regions, and the nuclear rings present us with an opportunity to study large numbers of these extreme clusters in relatively unobscured starburst environments. It has been suggested that super star clusters are present-day versions of young globular clusters. To evaluate this hypothesis, it is important to understand the physical properties and stellar contents of the clusters, but previous HST studies of nuclear ring galaxies have only used single-filter observations. Together with our UV data, new WFPC2 images will enable us to determine the H II region and cluster luminosity functions within nuclear rings, measure cluster radii, derive age and mass estimates for the clusters by comparison with evolutionary synthesis models, and study the structure and evolution of nuclear rings.
Category: ISM IN EXTERNAL GALAXIES.  We have recently been granted time on FUSE to characterize the escape fraction of hydrogen Lyman continuum {Lyc} photons from a morphologically diverse set of star forming galaxies.  The FUSE program is designed to provide ~ 5 sigma detections of  Lyc photons emitted from star forming galaxies with escape fractions ~5%.	With this proposal we seek hydrogen Lyman alpha {Lya} observations of a representative subset of the FUSE program targets to constrain the observational relationship between Lyc, Lya, and hydrogen Balmer line emission in these systems.  Such observations explore the detailed balance between the simple optically thin {Case A} and optically thick {Case B} limits in recombination theory.  The ultimate goal of this program is to quantify the relationship between escaping Lya and Lyc emission and the first structures that form in the early universe.
