Category: GALAXIES & CLUSTERS.  We propose to carry out a WFPC2 snapshot survey in F606W for a sample of 107 nearby, non-barred Sa and Sb spiral galaxies. The aim of the survey is to investigate the core properties, their correlations with global galactic properties, and the frequency of occurrence of multiple and/or miscentered nuclei. In addition, the proposed exposures allow the detection of globular clusters at least down to a magnitude of V=25.3. These results will be compared with those found for early-type galaxies. The proposed targets are obtained from a sample of 134 nearby, normal, non edge-on spirals once 27 already observed in the course of other HST projects have been subtracted.
Category: UNRESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS.  At luminosities above 10^11.4 L_sun, the space density of far-infrared selected galaxies exceeds that of optically selected galaxies. These `luminous infrared galaxies' {LIRGs} are primarily interacting or merging disk galaxies undergoing enhanced star formation and Active Galactic Nuclei {AGN} activity, possibly triggered as the objects transform into massive S0 and elliptical merger remnants. We propose NICMOS NIC2 imaging of the nuclear regions of a complete sample of 88 L_IR > 10^11.4 L_sun luminous infrared galaxies in the IRAS Revised Bright Galaxy Sample {RBGS: i.e., 60 micron flux density > 5.24 Jy}. This sample is ideal not only in its completeness and sample size, but also in the proximity and brightness of the galaxies. The superb sensitivity and resolution of NICMOS NIC2 on HST enables a unique opportunity to study the detailed structure of the nuclear regions, where dust obscuration may mask star clusters, AGN and additional nuclei from optical view, with a resolution significantly higher than possible with Spitzer IRAC. This survey thus provides a crucial component to our study of the dynamics and evolution of IR galaxies presently underway with Wide-Field, HST ACS/WFC and Spitzer IRAC observations of these 88 galaxies. Imaging will be done with the F160W filter {H-band} to examine as a function of both luminosity and merger stage {i} the luminosity and distribution of embedded star clusters, {ii} the presence of optically obscured AGN and nuclei, {iii} the correlation between the distribution of 1.6 micron emission and the mid-IR emission as detected by Spitzer IRAC, {iv} the evidence of bars or bridges that may funnel fuel into the nuclear region, and {v} the ages of star clusters for which photometry is available via ACS/WFC observations. The NICMOS data, combined with the HST ACS, Spitzer, and GALEX observations of this sample, will result in the most comprehensive study of merging and interacting galaxies to date.
Category: Stellar Populations.  We propose to complete multi-wavelength broad- and narrow-band imaging, from the ultraviolet through the near-infrared, of a sample of 13 of the most extreme star-forming galaxies found in the nearby (D < 100 Mpc) universe. These include massive and dwarf, interacting and isolated, dusty and nearly dust-free galaxies.  The intense star formation in these galaxies can result in the formation of extremely massive young star clusters, in excess of a million solar masses, similar to the most massive known ancient globular clusters and 1-2 orders of magnitude more massive than any young cluster found in nearby quiescent/normal star-forming galaxies.  The properties of clusters and larger scale star-forming clumps in intense star-forming environments are required to address a number of outstanding issues, including whether the fraction of stars in bound clusters or the upper cutoff in cluster mass functions increases with star formation intensity, and how long the clumps survive.  Our results will differentiate between various assumptions and prescriptions for feedback used in the current generation of cosmological hydrodynamic simulations.  The multi-wavelength observations will allow us to constrain dust geometry, and begin to peer through the dust to discover some of the	clusters obscured at UV and optical wavelengths, work that will be completed by JWST.  A similar suite of benchmark HST observations of normal, nearby galaxies already exists as part of the LEGUS project, and will be used as a reference to quantify the extreme star formation in our sample.
Category: AGN/QUASARS.  Mass outflows of ionized gas in AGN, first revealed through blueshifted UV and X-ray absorption lines, are likely important feedback mechanisms for the enrichment of the IGM, self-regulation of black-hole growth, and formation of structure in the early Universe. To understand the origin, dynamics, and impact of the outflowing absorbers on their surroundings, we need to know their locations {radial positions and polar angles with respect to the AGN rotation axes} and kinematics {radial and transverse velocities}. We will use COS high-resolution spectra of 11 Seyfert 1 galaxies to derive velocity-dependent covering factors, ionic column densities, number densities {via metastable lines or variability}, and ionization parameters {via photoionization models} of the UV absorbers, and thereby determine their radial locations as we have done for NGC 4151. We will use absorption variability over time scales of up to ~20 years, to determine transverse velocities and detect changes in radial velocities. We will use STIS G430M long-slit spectra and WFC3 [OIII] images to resolve the kinematics of the narrow-line region {NLR} and determine the inclinations of the AGN, to investigate the connection between nuclear absorption and NLR emission outflows and their dependence on polar angle.
Category: STELLAR POPULATIONS.  We are proposing to use OB associations in M31, M33, and NGC 6822 to determine how stellar evolution proceeds for high mass stars.  What mass range turns into Wolf-Rayet stars rather than red supergiants?  What is the evolutionary link between WN and WC stars?  How are answers to these questions affected by metallicity?  Over the past decade we have completed surveys of Wolf-Rayet stars in selected OB associations of these three galaxies.  We also have data for determining the red supergiant content of these same regions. Although we have obtained UBV CCD data under subarcsecond conditions, and have extensive optical spectroscopy for the bluest stars, our interpretation of our HRDs is stymied by our inability to distinguish three crowded 40Mo of similar effective temperature from a single 90Mo star.	We need the 10* improvement in resolving power (compared to our best ground-based efforts) offered by the refurbished HST.
Category: GALAXIES & CLUSTERS.  We propose to carry out a WFPC2 snapshot survey in F606W for a sample of 107 nearby, non-barred Sa and Sb spiral galaxies. The aim of the survey is to investigate the core properties, their correlations with global galactic properties, and the frequency of occurrence of multiple and/or miscentered nuclei. In addition, the proposed exposures allow the detection of globular clusters at least down to a magnitude of V=25.3. These results will be compared with those found for early-type galaxies. The proposed targets are obtained from a sample of 134 nearby, normal, non edge-on spirals once 27 already observed in the course of other HST projects have been subtracted.
Category: INTERSTELLAR MEDIUM.  The Magellanic Clouds, because of their well-determined distance and small extinction, allow an unprecedented opportunity to observe many ISM phenomena occurring in a whole galaxy. The HST resolution {0.1" = 0.025 pc} offers detail hitherto poorly studied in the extragalactic context on the morphology and spatial relationships in various ISM processes associated with the evolution of Population I and Population II systems. This long term {11 cycles} parallel program exploits these opportunities by obtaining WFPC2 images of appropriate targets that are accessible at the same time as primary pointings. The number of priority parallel observations per Cycle is estimated at ~20; and our intent is to accumulate a significant archive of Magellanic Cloud direct images over the life of the program. The parallel targets, to be specified in crafting rules executed as part of the Phase II planning of each HST Cycle, will include {or search for} compact H II regions and young clusters, proto-stellar and maser regions, reflection nebulae, Herbig-Haro objects, stellar ejecta, SNR and wind-driven shells, shells, planetary nebulae and Very Low Excitation nebulae. The observations will be primarily in the Balmer lines and the stronger forbidden lines, with supplemental continuum images.
Category: STELLAR POPULATIONS.  The scientific aim of this proposal is to determine whether gas-containing dwarf irregular galaxies in the Local Group have significant populations of very ancient stars of age comparable to Population II stars in the Galaxy, and if so, whether the properties of these old populations vary with parent galaxy type. A critical diagnostic of a true Population II having both old age {14-16 Gyr} and low metallicity is taken to be the presence of an extended horizontal branch in a color-magnitude diagram. We propose to obtain WFPC2 images in the F555W and F814W bands of two of the nearest Local group dwarf irregulars, WLM and Phoenix, in order to construct color-magnitude diagrams capable of revealing an extended horizontal branch. The CM diagrams will also allow the V-I color distribution of the Population II red giant branch to be determined, from which the mean metallicity and the metallicity dispersion will be derived.
Category: UNRESOLVED STELLAR POPULATIONS AND GALAXY STRUCTURE.  We propose to use WFC3 to perform a contiguous, high spatial resolution UV (F336W) and IR (F160W) survey of an area of ~100 square arcminutes in the core of the Coma cluster of galaxies. The area is already surveyed by our group in optical passbands with the ACS F475W and F814W filters. The new UV and IR data will be used, in combination with existing ACS data, for studies of the populations of Globular Clusters (GCs), Ultra-Compact Dwarf Galaxies (UCDs), and Nuclear Star Clusters (NSCs) in Coma galaxies and in the cluster environment. Using an innovative technique developed by members of our team, we can essentially eliminate foreground and background contamination from samples of compact stellar systems. This allows us, for the first time, to perform the most detailed assessment and study of the very large population of Intracluster GCs in a nearby rich cluster (i.e. Coma), to find why this population is so abundant, and why it contains such a significant metal-rich component, which is unexpected if the origin is from stripping of clusters from low-mass dwarf galaxies. For NSCs, the additional passbands will allow us to test predictions of the relationship between NSC properties and age and metallicity gradients in the host galaxies, which in turn helps to understand the NSC formation mechanisms, and the timescale and feedback process that truncate the star formation. This is the last opportunity to perform a rest-frame UV survey at z=0, given the rapidly declining capability of WFC3/UVIS and the fact that there is no prospect for a future UV space mission for decades to come.
Category: ISM IN EXTERNAL GALAXIES.  We have recently been granted time on FUSE to characterize the escape fraction of hydrogen Lyman continuum {Lyc} photons from a morphologically diverse set of star forming galaxies.  The FUSE program is designed to provide ~ 5 sigma detections of  Lyc photons emitted from star forming galaxies with escape fractions ~5%.	With this proposal we seek hydrogen Lyman alpha {Lya} observations of a representative subset of the FUSE program targets to constrain the observational relationship between Lyc, Lya, and hydrogen Balmer line emission in these systems.  Such observations explore the detailed balance between the simple optically thin {Case A} and optically thick {Case B} limits in recombination theory.  The ultimate goal of this program is to quantify the relationship between escaping Lya and Lyc emission and the first structures that form in the early universe.
