Category: .  This program monitor changes in filter transmission over the area of the detectors. This program builds and extends Cycle 19 Programs 12698 and 12699, Cycle 18 Programs 12334 and Cycle 17 Programs 11903 and 11926. The last time all the filters were checked was  in Cycle 17. DescripSon of the observaSons: WFC3 UVIS and IR  observations of stars GD153 and P330E are obtained in subarrays in two UVIS amplifiers and two quadrants of the IR detector to monitor changes in the filter transmission in all the UVIS and IR filters. We expect to repeat the program in Cycle 21 with UVIS quadrants B and C. This monitors spatial variations in the performance of the filters, changes in bandpass {via the use of stars of different colors}, and changes in total transmission.
Category: AGN/QUASARS.  The coevolution of central black holes and their host galaxies appears to be driven by starburst and AGN activity, and their respective energy feedback. Most models invoke gas-rich major mergers as the triggering mechanism for this process.  Depending on the evolutionary state of the system, the AGN can be heavily obscured by dust and appear as a type 2 QSO, eventually evolving into an unobscured type 1 QSO that blows away the gas and dust.  In an effort to test this popular scenario, we have been awarded a significant amount of Herschel time to measure the ISM {dust} content and star formation rates of two well-studied samples of low-redshift, luminous AGNs: the complete sample of 87 z < 0.5 Palomar-Green type 1 QSOs and a carefully matched sample of 88 type 2 QSOs selected from SDSS.  Here we propose to conduct a WFC3 snapshot survey to provide the crucially missing data on the stellar properties of the host galaxies.	We will obtain rest-frame images in the B and I bands to probe the young and old stars, respectively, with the observed filter combination carefully chosen to minimize contamination by strong nebular emission lines. We will apply 2-D fitting {with GALFIT} to rigorously characterize the morphologies, bulge properties, bulge-to-disk ratios, and integrated colors and color gradients of the hosts.  We will quantify the frequency and strength of tidal interactions to constrain the merger hypothesis.  Together with the Herschel data, the HST data will provide a fundamental dataset for testing the evolutionary link between type 1 and type 2 QSOs, and the broader relationship between black hole growth and galaxy formation.
Category: .  The photometric throughput of WFC3 is monitored periodically during the year to evaluate its stability. The data consist of spectrophotometric standard star images in the UVIS channel, in a subset of key filters plus the UVIS grism. The observation cadence, once every five weeks, is deliberately out of phase with the monthly anneal procedures (proposal 13554) in order to sample the phase space. Aperture photometry results are used to assess the UVIS flux stability as a function of time and wavelength. In conjunction with other programs, the data are also used in the photometric zeropoint determinations.
Category: STELLAR EJECTA.  Proto-planetary nebulae {PPN} provide the best opportunity to test theories of asymptotic giant branch mass loss {symmetric/asymmetric, continuous/episodic} and the processes which shape planetary nebulae. These remain among the outstanding unsolved problems in stellar evolution. We propose to use WFPC2 to observe several new PPN which display evidence of being bipolar, to study this phenomena. These will be modeled using our newly-developed axially-symmetric, 2-D, dust, radiation-transfer code. We have previously used WFPC2 to image 4 new bipolar PPN, and have successfully modeled their structures and spectral energy distributions. This proposal will extend this study to additional PPN and give important evidence on how common is the bipolar structure. In addition, we have found concentric arcs, seen previously in the Egg Nebula, to exist in 2 additional bipolar PPN. This has important implications for the mass loss mechanism. We will investigate the existance of these arcs in additional bipolar PPN by obtaining deep images.
Category: .  The spectacular structures seen in HST images of planetary nebulae {PNe} are generally accepted as originating from hydrodynamical interactions between stellar winds: the interacting-stellar wind model {ISW}. Traditionally, the shaping is thought to occur after the star becomes hot enough to ionize the PN. But recent HST images indicate that the shaping may occur earlier, and the newer GISW model puts the shaping during the pre-planetary nebula evolution. The relative importance of both models is not known: GISW shaping will account for some fraction of PNe, but estimates range from 15--100 during the PN phase, especially for the youngest PNe. We here propose an HST SNAPshot survey of compact PNe in the Galactic Bulge, to test these predictions. The Bulge provides the only PNe population for which progenitor masses are known and nebular ages can be measured. In support of these HST measurements we have already measured velocity fields and emission line fluxes. The survey will give an unbiassed sampling of morphologies, and allow evolutionary sequences to be determined to test the ISW versus the GISW model. By-products of the survey will be the determination of nebular masses, diameters and filling factors. We will also obtain the White Dwarf mass distribution in the Bulge, and the initial-final mass function for low-mass stars.
Category: EXTRA SOLAR PLANETS.  Super-Earths are the single most common type of extrasolar planet, and also one of the least well-understood. We expect these planets could form with a broad range of bulk compositions, including true "super-Earths" with primarily rocky interiors, "water worlds" with a supercritical interior surrounded by a steam atmosphere, and "mini-Neptunes" with a thick hydrogen and helium atmosphere surrounding a rocky or icy core. In this proposal we focus on five planets with masses ranging from that of Neptune down to that of the Earth, and use a combination of visible-light and near-IR transmission spectroscopy to constrain their atmopsheric compositions and resolve degeneracies in their corresponding interior compositions. Our observations will probe the poorly understood transition region between gas giant planets and terrestrial worlds and provide the first detailed look at the diversity (or lack thereof) of planets in this mass range.  These same data will also enable the first detailed studies of cloud properties in these atmospheres, which can dramatically alter their atmospheric temperatures and corresponding compositions. The proposed studies will pave the way for future observations of this class of planets with JWST.
Category: .  The properties of the first black holes (BH) that 'seeded' the growth of supermassive BHs are poorly understood, even though these seed BHs represent critical boundary conditions for models of BH/galaxy (co)-evolution.  Local dwarf galaxies provide our best opportunity to obtain observational constraints.  Here, we propose multiwavelength Chandra, HST and VLA observations to investigate the nature of candidate nuclear BHs in three nearby dwarfs.	Our targets were recently identified within the Chandra archive, and they represent a population missed by surveys at optical wavelengths.  These observations will place new constraints on seed BH masses, and they will help inform future multiwavelength surveys for BHs in the nuclei of dwarf galaxies.
Category: Exoplanets and Exoplanet Formation.  Actively accreting protoplanets offer a direct view of a critical phase of planet formation and help set the initial state of planets' entropy and luminosity evolution. However, discoveries of these planets are extremely rare, with the young PDS 70 transition disk system being the only example. Recent HST observations of the few-Jupiter mass planet PDS 70 b demonstrate the WFC3/UVIS instrument's excellent performance in directly detecting the H-alpha emission from the protoplanet. This new development enables a promising strategy to search for accreting protoplanet: high-contrast imaging observations of faint stars that host gapped transitional disks. These stars are not accessible to ground-based adaptive optics.  We select ten stars that are most likely to yield planet detections and propose HST/WFC3/UVIS direct imaging observations in the F656N filter. These observations will form a high-quality point spread function library that facilitates precision primary subtraction. The processed images will be sensitive to accreting sub-Jovian-mass planets in the transitional disk gaps, and therefore, have the potential to significantly increase the number of protoplanet discoveries.
Category: BINARIES AND STAR FORMATION.  RY Scuti is a post-main sequence, eclipsing, 'overcontact' binary. The two components are very massive, 49 and 39 M_odot , with a combined luminosity in excess of 3* 10^6L_odot . Ground based observations have established that this star is surrounded with a very unusual nebula about 1 arcsecond in extent containing both ionized gas and thermally emitting dust. The Ne abundance in the nebula is well above solar composition, indicating the system is at a critical phase of its evolution. We propose to image the nebulosity around RY Scuti to investigate its morphology and the mass loss process in the system. We will use these images to distinguish between hypothesized mass loss scenarios and to study the interface between the plasma and dust regions of the nebula.
Category: .  The photometric throughput of WFC3 is monitored periodically during the year to evaluate its stability. The data consist of spectrophotometric standard star images in the UVIS channel, in a subset of key filters plus the UVIS grism. The observation cadence, once every five weeks, is deliberately out of phase with the monthly anneal procedures (proposal 13554) in order to sample the phase space. Aperture photometry results are used to assess the UVIS flux stability as a function of time and wavelength. In conjunction with other programs, the data are also used in the photometric zeropoint determinations.
